David Boder: [In English] Paris, July 30th. July 30th, 1946. I am interviewing now a gentleman, a Polish refugee, Mr. Boleslaw Czolopicki.
David Boder: [In Russian] No family, forty-three years old.
David Boder: [In English] Alright, er, you understand English?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: Yes. I understand a little.
David Boder: [In English] Now, I will ask you in English, and you please answer in Polish. Understand? You can answer in Polish, because we want to have it in the language you can best speak. You understand? Where were you born, Mr. Czolopicki?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: In Poland?
David Boder: Yes.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: I must speak...in Poland?
David Boder: No, no, you speak Polish. Where were you born?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] I was born in Warsaw.
David Boder: [In Russian] In Warsaw? Do you have a wife, children?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] No. No.
David Boder: [In Russian] Do you understand my Russian?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] I understand.
David Boder: [In Russian] I will speak in Russian, and you will answer in Polish. When did you leave Russia? Poland?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] It was after the Warsaw Uprising in ’44.
David Boder: [In Russian] Oh, in ’43. And where did you go?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] I was deported by the Germans.
David Boder: [In Russian] In ’43?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Not in ’43. In ’44.
David Boder: [In Russian] Oh, you left Warsaw in ’44? Why did you leave Warsaw?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Well, the Germans were deporting everybody out of Warsaw.
David Boder: [In Russian] And where did they deport you?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] They deported us to the Rhineland.
David Boder: [In Russian] Well...Now I want you to tell me everything that happened to you from the moment when the Nazis had taken Warsaw to the moment when you had been liberated in Paris. Tell me...And don’t skip anything, tell me all the details.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] The moment that on the 5th of October 1944 the Germans deported...the entire population of Warsaw...er...to Germany. It’s a bit hard for me...
David Boder: To speak in Polish?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: No. Just what form to take...
David Boder: [In Russian] Speak freely. Speak as if you were chatting with somebody else. That’s all.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] So...we were sent, I mean we were given the opportunity...to pack our things, just what we could put on ourselves...to walk on foot to Ursus, a place a few kilometers out of Warsaw. There, we were kept for about two days, and then in freight trains...er...under German...escort. They transported us for almost five days and nights into the heart of Germany, to the Rhineland.
David Boder: [In English] And then?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish]...Of course the people were very mixed—meaning women, children, men, everybody together. The conditions were dreadful because, for example, in the freight cars there were no...suitable facilities...they sometimes stopped so that one could go to the toilet. All of this, of course, under supervision by the guards, men and women together, nothing else was possible...And the food was also very poor, we ate just once a day...When we found ourselves in [Wanne?] near Bochum we arrived at the precise moment that Bochum was being bombarded by...the English. The result of this air-strike was that five of our wagons were burned, several people burned too, killed...The rest of us were transported to a camp, to a distributing camp...near Essen. There, of course, we were also kept under very primitive conditions. [Unintelligible] in the floor, crowded conditions, one person on top of another, no bedding. There we were kept...a month, or two months, I think. Then, we were taken to various factories, or else placed on a list for farm work. I found myself...in Geldern-Kapellen...I was employed at a camp which...deportees worked there, digging trenches...There, I spent...remained, until...liberation by the Americans. March 3, 1945 we were liberated by the Americans...So at that time German deportations ceased. Am I to go on to talk of further...
David Boder: [In Russian] Yes, yes.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish]...Then with the Americans...I signed up to work for the Americans and came to France with the Americans. For a while, I worked with Americans in France. Then I resigned, came to Paris where I began further studies at the school of design.
David Boder: [In Russian] Tell me the following. Did you work [or] did they keep you in “concentration camps”? Konzentrationslager?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] No, it wasn’t really a concentration camp, but a camp for those deported specifically to work.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, you were working. How was the food?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] The food was, of course...rutabaga, it was [background noise; unintelligible]. Food.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, and who were your supervisors: Germans or Poles?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] No. Germans, of course. Those who served in those yellow uniforms. It was their—I can’t remember what it was called—members of the German People’s Party.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, aha.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] In yellow uniforms with those armbands
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, aha, SS swastikas.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] It probably was [background noise; unintelligible]...which will go on for a while.
David Boder: [In Russian] And where did the Americans liberate you? In which town?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] [Inaudible] Moers.
David Boder: [In Russian] Moers...over the Rhine?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: Yes.
David Boder: Aha. Do you plan to return to Poland?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] At present I plan to finish my studies here [inaudible]. Which will still take a while.
David Boder: [In Russian] And what are you studying now?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] At the moment I’m learning the radio.
David Boder: [In Russian] The radio. Are you paying to study at this school?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Up to now, I’m paying at that school.
David Boder: [In Russian] You’re paying?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] But here, I’m to be paid for. In this school...
David Boder: [In Russian] And your school, is it a day school? Do you have some job in Paris?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] No. I mean, so far, I worked, but now, because I signed up for that course, I’ve stopped working. And here that course will be paid for.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, and where in Paris do you live?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] At Le Bonoir [?]
David Boder: [In Russian] Do you pay for your lodgings, or is it communal living for many Poles?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] No, I live in a hotel.
David Boder: [In Russian] Have you any relatives in America? Any members of your family in the U.S.?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] No. I have no relatives in America.
David Boder: [In Russian] You have no relatives in America. And what do you plan to do: will you stay in France, or something else?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] I would most like to emigrate.
David Boder: [In Russian] Where to?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Let’s say precisely to America.
David Boder: [In Russian] To America?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] If it were possible.
David Boder: [In Russian] Tell me something. When you lived in Warsaw up to ’44, were you there during the destruction of the Jewish ghetto?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Yes. I was. I was there the whole time up to ’44. I was in Warsaw during the entire period of the war. Of course, I also had to keep hiding from the Germans.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Even...under an assumed name. At the time of that Pogrom...I was in Warsaw. And...I kept observing and seeing, of course, the battle of the ghetto.
David Boder: [In Russian] And you think that having no relatives in America, it would be possible for you to travel there? Would you like to go to South America?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] Brazil.
David Boder: [In Russian] Brazil. Do you speak French well?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] A bit. I understand it, I mean.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] I can read it...
David Boder: [In Russian] You can read it?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] I write it quite well...
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha.
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] It’s just that speaking...when it comes to speaking it still presents certain problems...[background noise; unintelligible]...very quickly
David Boder: [In Russian] Thank you, Mr. Czolopicki. I was very interesting to talk to you. I would like to propose one small experiment...I have some pictures. What do you think this picture represents?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] It’s a photograph of a woman [background noise; unintelligible]
David Boder: [In Russian] Speak up. Well, and what does it represent?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish]...a boy, lost in thought, sitting on [unintelligible]
David Boder: [In Russian] Good. What does this picture represent?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish]...[long pause] And this represents...a sick person, dead, or dying, and above her stands...
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, and what is happening in this picture?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] It looks as though women are running away from some air raid.
David Boder: [In Russian] Aha, and this one?
Boleslaw Czolopicki: [In Polish] [background noise] It’s farm work. On one side...work on a piece of land, cleaning or [background noise; unintelligible]...on the other side some mountaineer with a book in his hand is teaching. A woman [unintelligible].
David Boder: [In English] Alright.